[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>LISA GARR: What is one of
the most important things that
can help us in a time of
need, crisis, or loneliness,
that also can bring happiness,
celebration, and joy?
It's community.
It's the one thing
that we can rely
on that has lasted
generation after generation.
Hi.
I'm Lisa Garr, and joining me is
poet and philosopher Mark Nepo.
He is a "New York
Times" bestselling
author of over 20
books, including
"The Book of Awakening."
He's appeared on "Oprah"
and "SuperSoul Sunday"
many times, sharing his
deep spiritual wisdom.
And for his latest book, he's
got "More Together Than Alone."
Mark has spent 13
years gathering stories
from diverse
cultures and history
to prove that we are
more together than alone.
Welcome.
Thank you for joining me.
>>MARK NEPO: Oh, it's a joy
to be with you, absolutely.
>>LISA: The timeliness of
this book is incredible,
yet you've spent 13 years
researching this topic.
>>NEPO: Yeah.
You know, the timing that
it's done is way beyond me.
I mean, I started this, as
you said, many years ago,
and I was really interested
in gathering stories
that would lift up and
affirm the lineage of care
and interdependence.
And I wasn't looking to
create a social theory
or have anything be academic.
I simply wanted
stories of moments
when we've worked well together
and the lessons, because that's
a lineage too.
And you know, I was just working
like a little worker bee,
and it's actually,
of all my books--
because it was so vast,
it can't be definitive.
It's just what I was able
to glean with my heart lens,
bring together, and learn from.
But it was the only book
that, in the middle of it,
I wondered, will I be
able to finish this?
I was so deep in the midst
of all of the stories and all
the research, and then I
saw, you know, a way through,
and yeah.
Yeah, I was clear that I could.
>>LISA: I understand what
you're talking about,
because when I started the
book, you so beautifully lay out
everywhere community
is in nature.
Through the forest floor
and the cells of our body,
it is everywhere.
When you start to see
it, it is everywhere.
>>NEPO: It is everywhere,
and it helps--
and you know, it's
very interesting to me,
and a great example which
is early in the book
is aspen groves.
And you know, aspens--
so a lot of people know
this, but an aspen grove
can be hundreds of square miles.
And the thing that's
unique about them
is that above ground,
they're individual trees,
but below ground, they
share one root system.
And it's a perfect metaphor
for community throughout time
because we are, at
once, individuals.
We're here.
We're sitting here.
We're not physically connected.
But under ground, that is in
the invisible foundational world
of spirit, we have
one root system.
And so beyond altruism, beyond
the virtues of kindness,
we have to care about
each other's roots.
Because if I'm
diseased, you have
to care because
it's your roots too.
So we are wired to care about
each other and our well-being.
>>LISA: And what I
also got out of that,
and when you said
the whole forest
could burn down, that
the community will
rise it back up again and grow
the aspens out of the ashes.
And that is so exactly
what we're going
through in our world today.
>>NEPO: Well, it's very
powerful right now.
I mean, one of the things that
I've learned and looked at,
you know, with everything that's
happening, not just in America,
but also globally--
>>LISA: Globally.
Mm hm.
>>NEPO: Globally.
And I've looked throughout time
with this lens through history,
so I react in my own
individual personhood.
So in our time, you know, while
I'm a student of all paths,
I'm of Jewish heritage.
I had people in my
grandparents' generation
die in the Holocaust.
So here we are in 2018
and we're in America,
and when would I ever think
that we would see Nazis
in the streets of America?
So how am I, as a
person in a family here,
how do I deal with
that while it's
frightening and outrageous?
And then as I look
from all this research,
and as a spirit in
this lineage, so then I
tried to look back through
time and say, well,
what's going on here?
What's the pattern?
And so, you know, like
waves in the ocean that
go into their belly
and then they crest
and into their belly, there
have been periods repeatedly
throughout history where
we push each other away
and where we come together,
where we push each other away
and where we come together.
And so much of it has to do with
whether love or fear governs
us.
And so it made me-- you know,
one of the chapters in the book
is called "The Two
Tribes," so I want
to tell this kind
of imagined parable
because it really holds a deep
insight for me that I think
is relevant today.
So imagine back in cave times,
the first two people who
discovered they weren't alone.
You know, one person comes
to the mouth of the cave,
sees someone in there
and goes, oh, wait, whoa.
What are you doing here?
I thought I was all alone.
And so imagine that the person
in the cave looks and says, oh.
You're different, go away.
And I think that was the
beginning of the go away tribe.
>>LISA: I'm different than you.
>>NEPO: You're
different, go away.
And based on whatever level
of fear we wake up with,
now if that gets--
throughout history,
when we've had periods where
that fear has gotten greater,
then it's like, well I
can't trust you'll go away.
I have to put you
where I can watch you,
so I'll put you in a
camp or a refugee center
or a detention
center or a ghetto.
>>LISA: And make
you feel less than.
>>NEPO: Less than.
Less than.
And the other person at the
mouth of the cave looking in,
seeing another, said oh, you're
different, come teach me.
And that was the beginning
of the come teach me tribe.
>>LISA: That takes a certain
amount of evolution though.
That first tribe is a very
survivalistic separatism
type of tribe, and that
still exists very much today.
>>NEPO: Well, this is
the catch, if you will,
in this imagined parable,
because on the that side
of the come teach me tribe,
of which Plato was a part--
Plato said we are
born whole, W-H-O-L-E,
but we need each
other to be complete.
And at the greatest belief
that we need each other,
that we are more
together than alone,
we've had the greatest
periods of enlightenment
and civilisation.
But the catch is that we
belong to both tribes.
>>LISA: Hm.
True.
Now you've visited
many, many cultures.
When you went through
your exploration,
what did you start to find?
What sparked your interest
in this in the first place?
>>NEPO: Well, in
the first place,
it actually goes back
to my cancer journey,
though I didn't
know it at the time.
Because when I was in those
treatment rooms and waiting
rooms, it was a
moment of community.
And some of the people
that I was closest to,
I didn't even know, to
this day, their last names,
where they lived, what they did.
But we were thrown
into this raft
of a waiting room,
of a treatment
room in the sea of cancer,
and all of a sudden,
we're saying hi, how are you?
I'm afraid.
Me too.
And there was this bond where we
were more together than alone.
And I think years
later, it led me
to start to want to find this--
there have to be other
places and other things.
And actually, you know,
I dedicate this book
to Howard Zinn, the
great historian.
I didn't know him
personally long,
but toward the
end of his life, I
was blessed to know
him for a while,
and even in that short time,
he was a great teacher.
And I was working on this
and I asked him about this.
You know, I said,
well what do you
think about this, about
these moments of community?
Do you think this is possible?
And he said the most
remarkable thing.
He said oh, absolutely.
He said if you consider when
the Wright brothers flew
the first plane, it was only
in the air for 27 seconds,
but everyone knew it
was a matter of time.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>NEPO: And he said,
why not with community?
If we have these short moments
when we are our better angels
and we are our authentic selves
and we care for each other,
it's just a matter
of time before we
have a beloved community as
Martin Luther King talked
about.
>>LISA: Mm hm.
If that is the
purpose of the book,
is to really show how we are
better together and stronger
together than we are
alone, how much of America,
or I would say the
globe, do you see
as sided on the alone
and divisiveness
or on the togetherness?
>>NEPO: Well, I
think it's unclear
right now which
way this is going.
And the reason I say
that is certainly--
>>LISA: I agree.
>>NEPO: --is because
the divisiveness,
the fear, the violence.
When things fall apart--
this is like spiritual physics.
When things fall apart
in nature and humanity,
they make a lot of noise.
When things come together--
and they were always at the
same time, things falling apart
and things coming together--
they're quieter.
So right now, it's
unclear which way
it's tipping, though
there are definitely
large factions around the world
that are really taking root
in the go away tribe right
now, in the fear-based tribe,
and they're making
a lot of noise.
>>LISA: It gets a lot of press.
>>NEPO: Well I think
in the modern world,
we're addicted to the noise
of things falling apart.
>>LISA: Of course,
it's the whole dopamine
center of the brain that fear
and negativity stimulates,
and that gives people
a sense of survival.
But this idea about
community and peace, it
isn't as stimulating.
It isn't as newsworthy.
Why is that?
This
>>NEPO: This is one of the
roles throughout history
of suffering.
All these traditions speak
about it differently.
We don't sign up.
Nobody wants suffering.
But suffering is to humanity
what erosion is to nature.
Erosion makes the
mountains beautiful,
and suffering wears away
everything that's extraneous.
And it's interesting
that whatever
has created all of this,
whatever name you give
to it, that mystery has made
life just difficult enough
that we need each other, I think
to ensure the journey of love.
>>LISA: Yeah.
Mm.
Ultimately.
>>NEPO: Yeah.
And so, you know,
it's so interesting
that there's been studies done
about philanthropy and giving,
and it's so clear that people
who have less give more.
And one of the
assumed reasons or one
of the anecdotes
in the stories is
because through suffering opens
and deepens our compassion.
So if I know what
it is not to have--
>>LISA: Right.
Of course.
>>NEPO: One of my
personal family stories,
it's a mythology in my
family of my grandfather
who, in the Great Depression in
Brooklyn, they were immigrants.
Came over from Russia, had
nothing, were out of work.
And my grandfather
and our family history
was he would bring
strangers home to dinner.
And my grandmother
would take him aside
and go, what are you doing?
We don't have-- what
are we going to do?
And my grandfather would
kiss her on the cheek
and say, break whatever
we have in half.
It'll be enough.
>>LISA: Mm.
Really, this is it
you were raised with?
>>NEPO: Yeah.
>>LISA: That's wonderful.
Well you've had quite the
journey through cancer
and through your 20 books.
You went on a wonderful tour
with Oprah who looks just
like an incredible person.
>>NEPO: Oh, amazing.
>>LISA: Is she incredible?
>>NEPO: You talk
about authenticity,
she is what you see.
She is authentic and generous
and a real bridger, you know.
She just brings so many
people together constantly.
>>LISA: She has an
incredible community.
Yes.
>>NEPO: Well and I
think that, you know,
you look at her show through all
those years and in the work she
still does with "SuperSoul
Sunday" and the OWN channel,
but you look at the heart
of what she did, is she,
for 25 years and
continuing, has taken--
whether it's 200 men who've
been sexually abused,
or whether it's--
>>LISA: Divided America.
I've seen that.
>>NEPO: Right.
She has made these difficult
things public and intimate
to say, let's look at
the truth of our lives.
Let's bear witness,
and then as soon
as we do that, we find
we are each other.
>>LISA: Like you've
seen multiple times
in creating this book.
Can you give us other
stories of where
you've seen this wonderful type
of community and togetherness
heal and solve divisiveness.
>>NEPO: Oh, there's several.
Let me try to give
a few from way back.
You know, in the
second century BC,
there was what was known
as the Gandhara Empire,
and it was in what was
ancient Persia, which
is now in the Middle East,
probably around Pakistan.
And that was one
of the first where
the singularity
or the nationalism
that we are experiencing
today, where
all the different traditions
were kind of holing up.
This empire, this
Gandhara Empire
was the first cross-cultural
empire that not only welcomed
all the different Greek
and early Buddhist
and early Christian
and pre-Christian.
They created a university called
Taxila, and this university had
like 10,000 students that
were brought from all
over this empire,
and it was based
on that you had to learn
all the traditions.
And they literally had
64 to 80 different things
you could study.
Everything from astronomy
to divining water,
but they had
dormitories where you
had to live with your teacher,
like about 500 students to one
teacher, and you
had to take courses
in all different traditions.
>>LISA: What happened
though, Mark?
>>NEPO: Well, what happened
is those waves crest.
One of the things is that
communities don't last forever,
but they leave their wisdom and
their greatest gifts forever.
But the gifts and lessons
from that community,
while that actual
community was dispersed,
has gone on to fuel this
lineage of civilization.
Now if we move further into
more contemporary times, Rwanda.
And we know in 1994, the
horrible genocide in Rwanda.
And this I know because
there was, believe it or not,
one psychiatrist native to
Rwanda when this all happened.
They tried talking circles.
They tried forgiveness circles.
And it was so raw and so
fresh, it didn't work.
And what they tried, finally,
this psychiatrist, they devised
and they got a grant from
the Templeton Foundation
to help fund this.
They did seed grants
for businesses, farms,
for things that would help
these people regain their lives.
But the one
requirement was it had
to be a Hutu and Tutsi
working together.
>>LISA: Mm.
That's practical.
See, that makes a lot of
sense and you bring it
into the practical.
And it is interesting that the
healing circles and the talking
circles didn't necessarily work.
>>NEPO: Well it was too raw.
>>LISA: Right, in the beginning.
>>NEPO: So what happened
was, begrudgingly
to help each other, they
would work together--
and they chronicled
these cases-- they
wouldn't talk to each other.
But then eventually,
building something together,
a Hutu would drop a
hammer from a ladder
and a Tutsi would, here.
>>LISA: That's a big deal.
Yes.
That's a big deal.
There's a lot of history there.
>>NEPO: And they would
start to work together.
>>LISA: Don't you think
ultimately, Mark, that people
just want to belong
to something,
something greater
than themselves?
>>NEPO: Absolutely.
In fact, you know, we go back
to nature and our ability,
our need, our yearning to
join is imprinted in our DNA.
That if you take two
living heart cells
and put them in a Petri
dish and walk away,
and you come back
in the next day,
they will have found a
third and common beat.
>>LISA: Really?
>>NEPO: And they have found--
the doctor Ervin Laszlo,
who is a physicist,
he did experiments
with meditators,
having people meditate, and
a similar thing happened.
If you and I were the
subjects in this experiment
and we came in and
we meditated quietly
and they were tracking
our brainwaves,
after an hour or
so, our brainwaves
would started to meditate
to a common third wave.
>>LISA: A combination
of the two.
>>NEPO: And then if you
introduced a stranger,
he found, like if then
you asked me to leave
and brought a third person in,
very quickly, this third person
would start to meditate
their brain to the wave
that we had found.
>>LISA: So it's coherence.
>>NEPO: Its coherence.
>>LISA: So community
builds coherence.
>>NEPO: Well and what I feel is
that it's proof that intimacy
is what leads us to oneness.
>>LISA: Yeah.
I mean, you look at something
as devastating as the Holocaust,
and now you have second and
third generation of Holocaust
survivors that are starting
to heal this conversation,
going back to Germany and having
open circles and conversations,
and they're incredible.
And it is working.
It's going to take a while
because it's still so raw.
>>NEPO: Yeah.
You know, and I think
that this is so powerful,
these terrible moments, the long
moments of these atrocities.
And I think what we
learn from the Holocaust
and from Apartheid, from
Rwanda, from all these,
the things that have
come out of that,
like the Truth and
Reconciliation Commission
in South Africa, they have taken
the basic notion of bearing
witness, telling the
truth of our experience,
and allowing us to
make amends and repair,
and that that can't happen
unless it's done in public.
>>LISA: This is why we're
at this tipping point
and why it's so important for us
to have this conversation now.
We really can make
this decision.
I want you to take a look
at this great video where
Mark is talking about that we
are more together than alone.
>>NEPO: I'm really
exploring the power
and the history of community.
That is, moments throughout time
and across all cultures when
we've worked well together.
And it's taken me 13 years to
explore and work on this book,
never having any idea
that I would finish it
at a time in our world when
we are really being stretched
by discord and fear.
But one repeating theme,
one repeating insight that
seems to be in almost every
story in every culture
is that when fear makes us think
that self interest will protect
us, love and suffering
reaffirm for us
and help us rediscover
that we are, in fact, more
together than alone.
And so, repeatedly, even
though when things are always
breaking apart around
us, the quiet courage
that's always very
close to every one of us
is that, when we
reach out together,
that's actually
what protects us.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>LISA: So in this
video, it talked
about how when we reach
out in a time of need,
it brings us together more.
In a time of survival or how a
community bringing us together
can actually protect us against
the elements or the enemy.
We've seen this a lot
with natural disasters.
And we're up against
mother nature
and a community gets
devastated, and yet they
build their infrastructure
even tighter over the years.
>>NEPO: Well it's interesting
that, on a personal level,
and I think on a
community level--
you know, I learned in my
work with my other books
that on a personal
level, there are two ways
that human beings mostly grow.
One is by willfully shedding
what no longer works,
and the other is
we're broken open.
And we don't have to choose.
Like X and Y chromosomes,
we are made up
of different
combinations of both.
We will willfully shed some
things, and what we resist--
>>LISA: Persists.
>>NEPO: --will be broken open.
There's an old Roman
saying that the fates lead
those who are willing.
Those who won't, they drag.
So this has been
going on a long time,
but it also, I think,
applies communally.
That in these moments
of great disasters,
and no one again-- this is like
we're describing like gravity.
We're not saying go
out and find disasters.
Things happen.
And in those moments,
everything that we thought
was a requirement to behold
each other is washed away,
is broken open.
>>LISA: That's true.
It's true.
We let go of the old
ways of doing things.
>>NEPO: And now we
have to be there.
And I also think why
this is so important is--
and this is, again, a medical
or a biological metaphor--
but if we look at
humanity as a global body,
and every soul is a
cell in that body--
well, a body is
considered healthy
if it has one more
healthy cell than toxic.
You'd like a lot more, but
it's considered healthy
as long as there's
one more healthy cell.
And this is why every
single thing, including
our conversation or
the conversations
you have on your
show, the moments when
we are in those disasters
helping each other,
and you say, well, what
could saving one dog or one
grandmother on a porch do?
Well every single
act can help us
ensure that we're strengthening
the immune system of humanity,
that there is one
more healthy soul--
>>LISA: Healthy cell.
>>NEPO: --cell than toxic.
And that's why every act
in conversation of kindness
matters.
>>LISA: One more healthy soul.
That's all we need to be, is
that one more healthy soul.
That's beautiful.
In terms of community and
being stronger together,
what do you think
about technology?
Does it bring us together,
or does it divide us?
>>NEPO: Well I think both,
so let's talk for a second.
I love technology and I
wouldn't want to give it up,
but that's because it's
a tool that serves this.
It doesn't substitute for this
human, present, real contact.
>>LISA: It shouldn't.
>>NEPO: No, it shouldn't.
But what happens, I believe,
in our modern world,
is that technology is inert.
It doesn't have values.
It's something to use.
But if you and I are not
being present, fully alive--
and we don't have to
have things figured out,
but if we're not pursuing
an inner life about what
it means to be a here, then
the way water will fill
in any hole, the
characteristics of technology
will become our default values.
>>LISA: Hm.
Give me an example.
>>NEPO: Well, so you know,
the value of being present
and authentic is that
we are where we are.
We're in the moment.
>>LISA: Right.
>>NEPO: We're not
running off over here.
Well, if we're not
present, then what
are the characteristics
of technology?
It's fast.
You're in more than one
place at the same time,
and it starts to make us
feel like life is over there.
>>LISA: Or is there
something better over there?
So it could serve both--
>>NEPO: Well this is the
good thing about technology,
I feel it's an amazing
educational tool.
And it's also what I would
call an information commons.
Now the notion of the
commons, which is something
that I've seen throughout
the history of community,
is the commons are
considered, way back,
common land or resources that
we depend on, but nobody owns.
So a great example in Mongolia,
the shepherds who depend--
their herds of sheep depend
on these vast grasslands
that no one can own.
And they have their little
farms and their little homes
and their little
huts, but they have
to care for those common
grasslands that nobody owns.
Another is fishermen
in the ocean.
Nobody owns the
water, but you have
to care for it so that
they can get the fish
to feed their families.
And so when you think about
commons, we extend that.
The commons are things
like knowledge and things
we care about.
>>LISA: Well you were
talking about the oceans.
I mean, we have this huge
issue with our oceans
now in terms of radiation
and toxicity and plastics.
But yet, what's happening
is the gathering together
of these environmental
communities that are really
raising the awareness
about this or else I
couldn't speak about it now.
I'm not out there in
the middle of the ocean,
but I've heard so much about it.
So isn't contrast
healthy in a way, Mark?
Doesn't it create good?
>>NEPO: Well, I would want to
discern that a little further.
Contrast can be
healthy, but not always.
But I think
diversity is healthy.
That is, we need difference.
>>LISA: That's interesting.
>>NEPO: In other words, I
don't think we need to choose
between--
this is invoked from
a different tradition,
the Native American tradition.
Their elder counsels have
always, and still today,
meet in circle.
They all meet in a circle,
not just for equity
because there's no
head to the circle,
they meet in circle
so that everyone has
a direct view of the center.
I love that.
>>LISA: I like that too, yes.
>>NEPO: Because what
is inherent in that,
the assumption is we
need everybody's view
to understand the center.
No one view will do it.
So right away, forget
argument, forget debate,
forget persuasion.
We gather meaning.
We don't choose it.
Meaning is not seesaw.
You're up, therefore I am down.
>>LISA: Right.
We do gather it.
>>NEPO: And this is what's
the value of diversity.
And all you have to do is
look at nature, spring.
This is another great example
of community and diversity.
Every spring, thousands
of insects and birds,
each are born to pollinate a
particular and different plant,
shrub, fruit, or flower.
>>LISA: They have a purpose.
>>NEPO: So suppose
the bees come along
and were fundamentalist bees.
And they said, no.
We're all going
to do it our way.
There'd be no spring.
>>LISA: That's true.
>>NEPO: There'd be no spring.
We need every possible path.
And I believe even in
religious traditions,
that's why there are so many
traditions, because no two
people will be pollinated
spiritually the same way.
>>LISA: So you're saying
different religions,
different belief systems
are all a part of it?
>>NEPO: Including atheists.
>>LISA: Yes, it all has to
be that way in order for us
to cooperate.
>>NEPO: Because the
whole is greater
than the sum of the parts.
Because like that elder circle,
we need everybody's view.
We need to add--
so I need to say that we
come back to come teach me.
Oh, you're different.
You're on the other
side of the circle.
Don't go away.
Come teach me what I don't
know, what I can't see.
>>LISA: Just like a team
or a work environment,
everybody brings
their skill sets
and makes up a common
whole, makes up
the common greater good.
>>NEPO: So this brings
us to what prevents that,
what stops us traditionally?
And this, again,
is like any day.
I'm talking about this
now, but if I wake up
afraid enough or unworthy enough
or insecure enough tomorrow,
I'm going to need you to
remind me that, oh, no.
We belong to the
come teach me tribe.
But so one of the things that is
very human, but we need to help
guard each other.
And this comes
from Robert Keegan
is a developmental
psychologist at Harvard.
And one of the things that's
brilliant that he has done
is he defined centrism, like
egocentrism or ethnocentrism,
any kind of centrism where
you are self-centered.
He defined it as when we mistake
what is familiar as true.
>>LISA: Hm.
Give me an example of that.
>>NEPO: So it's the one
in the cave who says,
you're different, go away.
So therefore, I only want to
confirm what I already know.
Oh, I want to talk
to you because I
want to affirm that
the way I see things--
oh, you see it the same way.
Oh, that must be true.
>>LISA: And we must
be in the same tribe.
>>NEPO: So what it says though,
is that what's unfamiliar
or new--
>>LISA: Is a lie.
>>NEPO: --is false.
>>LISA: Right, right.
>>NEPO: That's
dangerous and we're
seeing that seeded today in
America and around the world.
Then when we're
secure enough, we
can say, thank
god you're not me.
Tell me what I don't know.
Tell me something I don't know.
Tell me something I've never
heard of before so I can grow.
>>LISA: I think that's great,
except we live in a world
today of fake news and lies.
So how do we discern what
we need to learn from those?
>>NEPO: Well, I think that every
human being has an authenticity
barometer which
is our open heart.
And we have a lot more
tools and technology,
but it's no different than
back in those cave times.
If we trust our heart, we
will discover that we're
more together than alone.
So what I believe is
that truth is truth,
and we don't have to meet
bullying and falseness
with bullying and falseness.
We need to meet it
with authenticity.
We need to stay grounded in
the truth and kindness that has
a longer and larger lineage.
>>LISA: I mean, I'm sure you've
done this over the last 13
years where you've
taken this concept,
we're more together
than alone, and it's
butted up against everything.
You've challenge it
against everything.
That's a big one.
>>NEPO: We will
always be challenged.
We will constantly
be challenged,
and we are in our
time right now.
And I don't have any answers.
I don't know.
I struggle with it.
>>LISA: You're working it out.
>>NEPO: I worry about it.
But I think also, the
paradox under that
is even when I look at the
TV and I get all excited
and worked up and feel like
how can this be happening,
we are they.
There is no they.
I think we can see--
so in Sierra Leone in the 90s,
after another brutal civil war
that was for 10, 15
years right in villages,
they created a thing
called Fambul Tok, which
means family talk.
And they brought people
together in a circle,
and there was a
man with one arm,
and they said, how
did you lose your arm?
I lost it in the civil war.
Who cut off your arm?
He did, across the circle.
And then there's this
long terrible silence,
and then the person who did it
came over and started crying,
and sat before the other man
and said I'm sorry, I'm sorry.
I think we can't underestimate
the power of truth
and the power of
the human heart.
And the challenge, individually,
and I think, in community,
is that the things that are
difficult in life, pain, fear,
violence, desperation,
grief, loss, they all
say hello by
[SOUND OF RUSHING FORWARD]..
They're in our face.
That's how they say hello.
And the human job, I believe,
our kind of job description,
if you will--
>>LISA: So we have one?
That's good to know.
>>NEPO: --as spirits and
bodies and time on Earth,
is to hold nothing back, open
our heart, and lean back in.
>>LISA: Yes, that takes
courage to-- that takes
a great amount of courage.
>>NEPO: And you know,
Mother Teresa called courage
doing small things with love.
So in our everyday life, we
have lots of opportunities
to practice that.
And when we do practice it, we
strengthen the immune system
of humanity.
We're not just doing
individual work.
We're doing global work.
>>LISA: It makes sense.
This is about deep listening.
You actually have a video
here I want to show people
about deep listening.
Take a look.
>>NEPO: Often, we're cast
about by the noise of the world
and the noise in our heads.
Often, we're mesmerized by
the stunning cacophony that
masks itself as excitement.
And though there's much to be
gained for being in the world,
we can't make sense of it
all until we stop the noise,
until we go below
the noise, until we
go below the habit
of our own thoughts.
But it's impossible to be
still and quiet all the time.
As a whale or dolphin
must break surface only
to dive back down again, only to
break surface again, each of us
must break surface into
the noise of the world only
to rest our way back into
the depth of stillness
where we can know
ourselves and life
more deeply, until we have
to break surface again.
No one is ever done with
this crossover between noise
and stillness, not
even those committed
to a contemplative
life, not even
those who are blind or mute.
For the noise of
the mind never dies.
It can only be put
in perspective,
quieted until we can hear
the more ancient voices that
give us life.
At every turn, we need to stop
the noise, our own and everyone
else's, not to retreat
from the world,
but to live more fully in it.
And the question I
want to offer you is I
want to ask you to be
still and quiet and listen.
And while you're listening,
identify one quality
that you were born with,
that no one gave you
and no one can take away.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>LISA: I pondered that thought
at the end of that video,
about that what is that
one quality that you were
born with no one can take away.
And what was the
other part of it?
That no one can--
>>NEPO: That no one gave you
and no one can take away.
>>LISA: Yeah.
And I looked, and immediately,
the answer that came up in me
is my ability to always see
the highest good in someone.
It's my innate--
and for a long time,
it was kind of
Pollyanna-ish that I always
saw the good in people.
I was fairly naive.
But now, I see why it's serving.
How it's serving is that I
see the gift in what people
have to offer humanity, and
it's why I do what I do.
And that's such
a great question.
Do you suggest people to do
this in a community circle,
or how do people work with that?
>>NEPO: Yeah, I do.
I do suggest people
to journal about it.
And the reason I offer that
is, you know, certainly, we
can learn from others.
But you know, traditionally,
the shadow of being taught
is that you are imposed
with someone else's values.
That's the shadow part.
But we always can learn
from other people.
And the shadow of just only
trusting your own experience
is that you're only
listening to yourself.
>>LISA: Ignorance, yeah.
>>NEPO: But so I offer
this as a way for people
to get in touch with
their true nature.
Everyone is born just
like those two heart cells
that will find each other.
Everyone is born with
an innate gift that
may manifest differently,
but at heart,
is the electricity of
aliveness that I believe
is manifest as
goodness in the world.
So I invite people to think
about, what were you born with?
One thing, and it could be as
simple is your ability to smile
or your ability to
laugh, you know.
I think, for me--
>>LISA: I want to ask you.
Yeah.
What is yours?
>>NEPO: Well I think two things.
I think, for me, I just
have this unbreakable belief
in the heart as our
strongest muscle,
as our greatest teacher.
You know, I can tell you
that in my lifetime, 67,
but there is a constellation
of times in my life
where, everyone
goes through this,
where my heart was shattered.
And I never thought
in each of those times
that I could ever be
put back together.
>>LISA: Especially with
your cancer journey.
>>NEPO: Especially
with my cancer journey.
And yet, at least so far--
maybe next time it
will be different,
but so far, I can
say to you today,
every time, not only was
my heart put back together,
but it was larger, stronger,
more sensitive, more gentle,
and more loving.
>>LISA: Is that how
you live your life
in a state of remission?
>>NEPO: Well I would say
yes, but I would even
take away the word remission.
Because I feel like-- you
know, it's interesting,
and I talk about
this in the book,
that in the legal view of
life from the beginning
of civilization and
community, you're
innocent until proven guilty.
But in the medical world,
you're sick until proven well.
So even the word
remission is a presumption
that you're on borrowed time.
You're sick.
You happen to be
well, but you're
really sick when nobody knows.
Nobody knows.
We could walk out
and get hit by a bus.
Nobody knows
anything, so it really
is a toxic way of holding it.
So I say that I'm
always healing.
I never say I'm healed.
>>LISA: It's a constant
state of healing.
>>NEPO: Yes, which I
think is for everyone.
Because I think the things that
we learn in difficult times,
whether it's as a
community or an individual,
the lessons are
graphic, but they apply
to everyone in ordinary times.
>>LISA: They can, yes.
Yes.
As I said, some of my
greatest weaknesses
end up being my greatest
strengths in the long run.
Individually, that
happens, but does that also
happen for a community?
>>NEPO: Well, I think
one of the things--
and we talked about
diversity before.
But I think just like
each person has a gift,
each culture has a
gift which I've seen
as doing all this research.
And just like when I made the
analogy to nature and spring,
we don't need to choose
between cultures.
We need the strengths
of each culture.
So for instance, in
the West, in America,
you know, self-reliance.
Self-reliance, independence
has been the great-- you know,
the understanding and pursuit
of a self in the West has been
the--
and the shadow of that
is self-centeredness,
which has become
maybe the greatest
modern psychological
disease we have.
And it's not by chance that
when you look at cancer,
where the cell is
so self-centered--
>>LISA: It just eats.
>>NEPO: --it will
eat everything,
including the whole.
The part will live.
The whole dies at the expense
of the self-centered part.
So in a way,
self-centeredness is
a cancerous
psychological disease.
So let's come back
to that in a second,
but in Africa, one of
the beautiful things
throughout Africa is there is
an inherent communal sense.
So one of the
things I learned was
that, for all the
different tribes and all
the different
languages in Africa,
there is no word for orphan.
>>LISA: Because there isn't any?
>>NEPO: Because their tribe
culture in all those nations,
going back indigenously,
is such an extended family
that if a parent dies,
the child is assumed
by the larger community.
>>LISA: That's why the
village was created.
>>NEPO: There's no
need for the word.
But it's not by accident
that we in the West
have trouble having
that sense of community,
but in Africa, there's trouble
finding a sense of self.
>>LISA: It's built in into that
community though, in Africa.
In the tribe, the
village is built in.
America was created
in a different way.
Pioneers forging
new paths, settling.
>>NEPO: Manifest destiny, yes.
But we need the gifts of
all these different cultures
and traditions.
Again, like the elders circle,
we need everybody's gifts.
We don't need to choose
or fight between them.
But let's go back to
our modern culture,
because there's
one other thing I'd
like to raise which has troubled
me and troubled everybody,
but I've tried to think
about from the lens of all
this research.
And that's the epidemic
of mass shootings.
>>LISA: I was just going
to ask you about that.
Yes, thank you.
>>NEPO: In our society.
Now, it's happening
around the world,
but in America, it's insane.
And this is, again, both
individually and communally,
every community
and individual will
be given the chance to be
dropped into the depth of life.
>>LISA: That's beautiful.
>>NEPO: And you know,
for me, it was cancer,
but it doesn't have
to be terrible.
It doesn't have to
be life-threatening.
It could be beauty or wonder.
These young people, this
shooting dropped all of them
into the depth of life.
They are very old
souls that have been
forced to rawly show up now.
>>LISA: But what they've
done for all young people--
>>NEPO: That's fantastic.
>>LISA: I mean, even my
daughter's school had walkouts
for 17 seconds or minutes of
silence for the 17 that passed.
And it was not school
approved, they just walked out.
And they had their moment,
and they remembered,
and they talked about what
these kids' lives were like.
They were soccer
players like them,
they were volleyball
players, they were academics.
And these kids got
to relate to it,
and this is all the way,
you know, across the nation.
And at the same time, all
created by social media.
>>NEPO: Well this
is, again, the--
you know, when social
media is in place
of authentic connection--
>>LISA: It's not good.
>>NEPO: It becomes toxic,
and it creates what
I call a virtual Colosseum.
You know, the Colosseum
in ancient Rome
where all the gladiators and,
you know, all the awful things
that happened, it
was designed as a way
to dissipate the energy of
rebellion in the people.
>>LISA: Oh, really?
To bring them together?
>>NEPO: Well, they
came together,
but so that all of that energy
of wanting a better life
and rebelling against
their circumstance
went in to the fights they saw.
It was dissipated.
It drew it off.
So today, I don't
think it's by design,
but our reality TV culture,
what they all do, by nature,
is you are not in
community, but it gives you
the illusion of community.
Like you vote or you think
you're participating,
but you have had no connection.
Remember the game
king of the hill?
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>NEPO: Well that is a practice
ground for the go away tribe
and for extreme competition.
Because you remember,
that game is
there can only be one person
at the top of the hill.
Everybody fights to get there,
literally kids on a hill.
And once you get there--
and I remember playing as a kid.
Once you get there, it's
the worst, most frightening,
loneliest, paranoid
place in the world
because everybody's after you.
And how different that
is than the fact, when I
learned finally, you know what?
There's room enough
up here for everyone.
We don't have to play this game.
>>LISA: And you really
look at everywhere how,
when you started
on this journey,
you couldn't see how it
would end because it isn't.
It's endless.
It's an endless topic.
>>NEPO: It is endless,
and so a couple of things
I want to share that I've
learned through this.
And one is that,
through all the stories,
if there's one kind of
insight or recurring
theme across culture
and history, is time
and again, when fear
makes a group of people
think that self-interest
will protect them,
love and suffering affirm that
we're more together than alone.
>>LISA: Interesting.
So interesting, yeah.
>>NEPO: Over and over again
in all different cultures.
>>LISA: And that's what
you state in the book,
and I think that's so great.
That's fascinating.
There's a whole online
community that you've also
built around this as well so
people can find each other.
>>NEPO: Well you know,
I'm just offering a tool.
You know, in all my books,
I try to offer questions
that help personalize the
lessons in individual life.
So what we've created is there
is an online community guide.
And in the book,
as you know, there
are questions that
invite you to gather two
or three friends,
four or five friends--
>>LISA: I love that.
>>NEPO: --and actually take
some of the things we're
talking about, and see where
it lives in your own life,
in your own community.
So in an example,
one of the notions
in the Jewish tradition,
there's a phrase, tikkun olam,
which means we are here
to repair the world.
Now inherent in that
is we are the world,
so the first thing is we've
got to repair ourselves.
>>LISA: Mm hm.
Well I love to ask
my guests, what
is your biggest why, you biggest
reason why you do what you do?
20 books, tour with Oprah,
everything you've done,
journey through cancer, why?
>>NEPO: Well, I think why I
venture into the inner life,
into the heart space
is because I just want
and need to be as alive as
possible while I'm here.
And I need to--
you know, this is in the
come teach me tribe, is,
you know, I've written 20 books
because I write about what I
need to know, not what I know.
If I only wrote
about what I knew,
I would have
written very little.
>>LISA: That's why
I do interviews.
I get it.
I learn so much from this space.
Well thank you so much for
showing us truly, repetitively,
in history and going
forward, how we
are more together than alone.
>>NEPO: Oh, a joy
to be with you.
>>LISA: Thank you so much.
>>NEPO: Thank you.
>>LISA: And if you'd like
to watch other interviews
with Mark Nepo, you can go
to "Inspirations" on Gaia
and you can check
them out there.
I'm Lisa Garr, and
until next time,
I invite you to stay aware.
[MUSIC PLAYING]